cpu_freq: enable thermal cap constraint (#108242)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/cpu_freq/thermal_cap.rst

.. _cpu_freq_thermal_cap:

CPU Frequency Thermal Cap
#########################

The CPU frequency thermal cap is an optional constraint layer for the CPU Frequency Scaling
subsystem. The active policy selects the requested P-state, and the thermal cap limits the

> highest-performance P-state allowed when configured temperature trip points are active.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
highest-performance P-state allowed when the configured temperature trip points are active.
```

This keeps performance demand and thermal mitigation separate:

> * the CPU frequency policy decides which P-state is desirable for the current load or pressure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the CPU frequency policy decides which P-state is desirable based on the current policy.
```

> * the thermal cap decides the highest-performance P-state currently allowed by temperature.

Reviewer: I think it may be more accurate to say:

```suggestion
* the thermal cap clamps the highest-performance P-state currently allowed by temperature.
```

And then maybe the next line is not required. The way it reads, it kind of makes me think there is a call in CPUfreq that is `MIN(pstate-policy, pstate-thermal-cap)`, but in reality, there is a call to thermal-cap which clamps the chosen pstate from the policy. It's not like there are two independent choices.

> The subsystem applies the lower-performance of those two choices before requesting the SoC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subsystem then applies the lower-performance of those two choices before requesting the SoC
```

Devicetree
**********

Enable the thermal cap by adding a :dtcompatible:`zephyr,cpu-freq-thermal-cap` node and enabling
:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CPU_FREQ_THERMAL_CAP`.

Example:

.. code-block:: devicetree

   cpu_freq_thermal_cap: cpu_freq_thermal_cap {
           compatible = "zephyr,cpu-freq-thermal-cap";
           sensor = <&temp0>;
           sensor-channel = "die-temp";
           polling-delay-ms = <1000>;
           trip-active-polling-delay-ms = <100>;

           trip_0 {
                   temperature-millicelsius = <85000>;
                   hysteresis-millicelsius = <5000>;
                   cap-pstate = <&pstate_1>;
           };

           trip_1 {
                   temperature-millicelsius = <95000>;
                   hysteresis-millicelsius = <3000>;
                   cap-pstate = <&pstate_2>;
           };
   };

When ``trip_0`` is active, CPU frequency requests are capped to ``pstate_1`` or lower.
When ``trip_1`` is active, requests are capped to ``pstate_2`` or lower. A cap does not
force the CPU to run at that P-state; a policy request for a lower-performance P-state
is left unchanged.

> Thermal cap constraints use the CPU frequency P-state table order. Earlier P-states

Reviewer: Nitpick: I think "earlier" and "later" is a bit unclear. I think you're talking about the index of the pstates and how they're defined.

Reviewer: I think the terminology of earlier/later is reused in docs later as well

Author: updated
